---
layout: post
title: "Collaboration is sometimes a euphemism"
category: thoughts
modified: 2015-11-11 09:10:34 -0500
tags: [coworking, collaboration, coworkers, neoliberal work]
image:
  feature: ./collab/header.jpg
  credit: 
  creditlink: 
comments: 
share: 
---
In the business and management world, a great deal of attention is devoted to producing, supporting, and sustaining collaboration. It seems popular business and management publications often claim collaboration is a secret ingredient to market success&mdash;["Collaborate to Win is the Paradox of Market Competition"](http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/234559)&mdash;or a pathway toward successful innovation&mdash;["The Way to the Future Through Collaboration: Tinkering With the Bounds of What's Possible"](http://www.wired.com/insights/2014/05/way-future-collaboration-tinkering-bounds-whats-possible/)&mdash;or simply a better way to work and retain employees&mdash;["Collaborate for Real: turning the lingo of collaboration into everyday practice"](https://hbr.org/2015/09/collaborate-for-real). In theory, this attention makes sense. Collaboration requires workers to reach beyond their individual skills and knowledges. When done right and well, collaboration results in interdependence amongst workers, thereby magnifying the abilities of individuals and producing new collective competencies. According to these publications, collaboration leads to a healthy work environment, a stimulating workplace, and a pathway for continued capital growth. Better yet, collaboration is a strategy toward all of these ends that also seems to be in the best interest of workers. 

>But what if collaboration isn't all it is cracked up to be?

While collaboration is not a new concept in work settings,[^1] recent attention to collaboration attends to various contemporary workplace issues. In an era of reduced budgets, thin margins, and lagging workforce development, legacy ideas like re-tooling manufacturing (e.g. automating car production lines) or mitigating supply chain loss (e.g. vertical integration) seem insensitive to current conditions. Amongst the issues plaguing contemporary companies, two issues seem to be most salient with respect to collaboration: human retention in an age of wage austerity and saturated competition in a rapidly changing marketplace. Both issues stem from the conditions of global capitalism, and seem impossible to be address through simply cutting costs or doing more. Instead, the prevailing logic is that companies need to differentiate[^2] products or disrupt[^3] existing conditions through attention to how they make what they make. In short, the key to business success lies in a different approach&mdash;namely, a creative approach&mdash;to day-to-day work in combination with critically reframing of what it is a company makes, all of which needs to happen at low or no cost.

In this milieu, collaboration has a strategic foothold. As an activity, collaboration is understood as capable of producing new ideas and outcomes without necessarily hiring new employees or building new hard infrastructure. Put bluntly, collaboration is a low-cost strategy to make the most of existing workers. As a work style, collaboration highlights the hidden capacities of people working together, thereby opposing Fordist models of compartmentalized work. Even more, collaboration parallels other socially minded ideas, such as the global citizen ("Think Global, Act Local") or the conscientious employer (take Tom's shoes for example), by foregrounding work as a social process. In this second regard, collaboration problematizes Fordist models of work that transform workers into input-output devices. By explicitly valuing sociality, collaboration moves beyond claims that work and sociality are oppositional. Instead, sociality is the secret to workplace success. In both regards, collaboration seems to herald workers as the collective savior of a company.

For a company, valuing collaboration makes good sense in terms of both corporate strategy and human resources. Collaboration holds the potential for new business opportunities through additive and synergistic work. Collaborative settings offer workers the ability to learn from others and potentially exercise creative thinking skills as they find ways to create output that would be impossible in sequential or individuated work. As such, a collaborative workplace purports to transform individuals in a collective by sharing responsibilities, as well as mitigating slow-downs by the same token. In theory, collaboration requires the suppression of egos, which from the corporate standpoint means a workforce might be more aligned with collective values (and hopefully those of the company itself). By moving beyond a compartmentalized approach to work, individual workers participate in a performed collective identity that is not parsable to its individual parts.

Beyond the stated goals of collaborative workplaces, attention to collaboraton cannot be separated from its potential shadow on a workforce. The very means of what makes collaboration useful and important to companies&mdash;namely, distributing responsibility and tasks in the hopes of synergy&mdash;are also the means through which collaboration can be a regime of control. With teams working in more integrated ways, individual workers no longer retain sole ownership over particular skills, outputs, or ideas. As much as distribution reduces bottlenecks and redundancies, it also acts as a type of de-/re-skilling. As teams build capacities, ideas, and methods, the actions of individual workers dissolve into those of the group, leading to less and less individual ownership over the process. Instead, workers construct particular relational skills within the tiny supply chain of a team. Of course, this notion is culturally paradoxical&mdash;collaboration coincides with language of increasing employee ownership over the things they work on (["If you want employees to work like they own the company, then give them a stake in the game."](http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/218028)). These relational skills, while vital to work, are not the work itself, but in fact are additional tasks. As a low-cost strategy, collaboration is therefore human resource intensive, that is, costly. Like the term "workplace flexibility"[^2], collaboration seems to used to disguise efforts to disempower workers in the exact moment of claiming their empowerment. As such, collaboration serves as a euphemism for a contemporary era of work.

On the ground, the euphemism of collaboration takes on particular characteristics. In my dissertation fieldwork at a company called LTC, I heard over and again how LTC frequently flew the banner of collaboration, yet did little to support its day-to-day activity. Many workers found this nominal attention to collaboration frustrating. A particularly salient example comes from the performance review process. At LTC, performance reviews primarily focused on those projects an employee led, or what employees colloquially referred to as "owning a project." As such, the performance review process soured the potential for collaboration by disincentivized working on projects of which one could not claim ownership. Here performance reviews value leadership rather than compromise, ostensibly making collaboration a hindrance to promotion. Collaboration is a euphemism for following rather than leading. Skills like interpersonal communication are rendered invisible through LTC's nominal support of collaborative work. To collaborate is to sacrifice one's career through uncounted work.

Outside of a corporate setting, collaboration is a different euphemism. In my more recent research into coworking spaces, collaboration frequently appears as a selling point. Coworking offers workers of various sorts&mdash; independent entrepreneurs, freelancers, remote workers, and startups&mdash;the opportunity to colocate. By doing so, individuals can bump someone new, hopefully spurring on new thinking, new connections, and new opportunities for success. While I am sure this happens (I have yet to hear a truly compelling story), collaboration seems to have a new valance of standing in for jobs that are rife with "shadow work",[^5] unpaid work that is vital to the completion of paid work and the movement of capital. 

At one of the first coworking spaces I visited, I spoke with Grant, a mid-40s remote employee. Grant worked for a small NGO based in the Southeast, and explained he had his particular position doing fund raising for years. Prior to joining the coworking space, Grant worked from his home office. Spending his days in his house, he felt cut off from the world, but also cut off from other workers. When I asked whether he worked with other people in the coworking space, he responded that nobody else from his NGO was in the area and no one else in the space worked for an NGO or did any kind of fund raising. He quickly followed up this statement by explaining that he frequently collaborated with other people in the space though. What he meant was not what I expected. In recent years he had been given new tasks, such as updating a portion of the NGO's website, announcing events on social media platforms, and organizing ways to reach donors online. While Grant knew about fund raising, these new tasks fell outside of the purview of his job five years ago. Rather than get discouraged, Grant explained that relied on the "young guys" in the space to help him in these areas. For Grant, reaching out to others was not a strategy for continued growth but a maintenance requirement to do his job. While his job expectations are not unheard of, Grant's response highlights how normalized this type of overextension has become. On top of the work Grant called his "core work" were still other tasks. These tasks fell outside of what Grant was trained in, meaning they required a midstream employee to gather new skills. Despite being tasked with this work, Grant was given no formal support from his company. These skills required his ad-hoc attention, or as Grant put it, "I’m able to get little bits and pieces like [reaching out on Facebook] that I can benefit from." For Grant, collaboration marked the increasingly consolidation of tasks as information and communication technologies have become part of a post-digital work landscape. Here collaboration is a euphemism a informal skill acquisition.

Again, the point is not to disparage collaboration on the whole. As an ideal and activity, collaboration has an important place, and can lead to productive avenues for workers and businesses. Instead, what is at issue is how collaboration stands in for or masks other activities. These two examples illustrate what collaboration might mean as a business or management strategy beyond its stated goals. These instances point out how workplace changes still exhibit known issues. In the end, collaboration might be yet another euphemism for business as usual.

---

[^1]: For example, the now-familiar term brainstorming dates back to the 1940s and early 1950s when Alex F. Osborn (then working as marketing firm BBDO)introduced the concept in a series of books: *How to 'Think Up'* (1942), *Your Creative Power*(1948), and *Applied Imagination: Principles and Procedures of Creative Thinking.*(1953). As a technique for ideation, brainstorming requires individuals to build off of one another's (hopefully wild) ideas. In an attempt to simply produce a quantity of potentials, brainstormers refrain from judging or otherwise evaluating ideas in the hopes that something unexepected rises to the surface. As the description illustrates, brainstorming plays into a mythos of creativity as a wild, uncontrollable, and subconcious process, tapped into by dislocating the self from social norms and bounded mental states. While brainstorming has been [handedly criticized](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/01/30/groupthink), the idea points out that collaboration (and more broadly creativity) has long been a corporate strategy. According to the mythology, brainstorming saved BBDO from implosion by tapping new capacities in existing workers by building group capacities.

[^2]: Chamberlin, E. H. (1969). *The Theory of Monopolistic Competition: A Re-Orientation of the Theory of Value (Eighth Edition).* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[^3]: Christensen, C. M. (1997). *The Innovator’s Dilemma: The Revolutionary Book that Will Change the Way You Do Business (First Edition).* Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

[^4]: Gregg, M. (2007). Freedom to work: The impact of wireless on labour politics. *Media International Australia*, (Special Issue on Wireless Technologies and Cultures).

[^5]: Illich, I. (1981). *Shadow Work.** Boston: Marion Boyers.

